#summary Resonance filter brief
#labels dsp

= Resonance Filter =

== What is a Resonance Filter? ==

  "Whenever the vibrations of one object cause a second object to start vibrating, the second object is said to be resonating with the first, and its vibrations can be called sympathetic vibrations. Resonance is very important in the physics of music. In fact, in many musical instruments, the part of the instrument that first produces vibrations is often a rather small, insignificant-looking part of the instrument - a thin string, or a sliver of reed. (In the case of brass instruments, it is not a part of the instrument at all, but the players lips, that produce the original vibrations.) The largest, most obvious part of the instrument - the delicately curved body of the violin, for example, or the many brass loops of the French horn is just the main resonator, and this resonating part of the instrument (often called the body of the instrument) determines, or helps to determine, many important apsects of the instrument's sound, including tone quality, timbre, and dynamic capabilities." -- [http://cnx.org/content/m13537/latest/ Resonance and Musical Instruments] by Catherine Schmidt-Jones

== Formant Filter ==

  "The resonating space of the voice, however, also has a pitch range, called the formant, in which it naturally resonates, so that any vibration in this range will naturally be louder than other vibrations." -- [http://cnx.org/content/m13537/latest/ Resonance and Musical Instruments] by Catherine Schmidt-Jones

  "A formant is a resonance in the voice spectrum. A single formant may thus be modeled using one _biquad_ (second-order filter section). For example, in the vowel /a/ as in 'father,' the first three formant center-frequencies have been measured near 700, 1220, and 2600 Hz, with half-power bandwidths 130, 70, and 160 Hz. 

  In principle, the formant filter sections are in series, as can be found by deriving the transfer function of an acoustic tube. As a consequence, the vocal-tract transfer function is an all-pole filter (provided that the nasal tract is closed off or negligible). As a result, there is no need to specify gains for the formant resonators -- only center-frequency and bandwidth are necessary to specify each formant, leaving only an overall scale factor unspecified in a cascade (series) formant filter bank.

  Numerically, however, it makes more sense to implement disjoint resonances in parallel rather than in series. This is because when one formant filter is resonating, the others will be attenuating, so that to achieve a particular peak-gain at resonance, the resonating filter must overcome all combined attenuations as well as applying its own gain. In fixed-point arithmetic, this can result in large quantization-noise gains, especially for the last resonator in the chain. As a result of these considerations, our example will implement the formant sections in parallel. This means we must find the appropriate biquad numerators so that when added together, the overall transfer-function numerator is a constant. This will be accomplished using the partial fraction expansion." -- [http://ccrma-www.stanford.edu/~jos/filters/Formant_Filtering_Example.html Introduction to Digital Filters with Audio Applications] by Julius O. Smith III